Initial version of the Incremental DNSSEC draft (#1)
NLnetLabs/incremental-dnssec: draft-homburg-deleg-incremental-dnssec.md

number:
date: 2025-01-06
consensus: true
v: 3
area: int
workgroup: DNS Delegation
keyword:
 - Internet-Draft
 - DNS
 - Resolver
 - Delegation
 - Authoritative
 - Deployable
 - Extensible
venue:
  group: deleg
  type: Working Group
  mail: dd@ietf.org
  arch: https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/dd/
  github: NLnetLabs/incremental-dnssec

author:
 -
    fullname: Philip Homburg
    organization: NLnet Labs
    email: philip@nlnetlabs.nl
 -
    fullname: Willem Toorop
    organization: NLnet Labs
    email: willem@nlnetlabs.nl

normative:

informative:

--- abstract

This document proposes a DNSSEC delegation mechanism that complements {{?I-D.homburg-deleg-incremental-deleg}}.
In addition this mechanism simplifies multi-signer setups by removing the need to coordinate for signers during key rollovers.

--- middle

# Introduction

This document describes a DNSSEC delegation mechanism that complements {{?I-D.homburg-deleg-incremental-deleg}}.
In particular, this mechanism makes it possible to store the contents of DS records as 'ds' parameters in SVCB-style records.
This way, a single mechanism can specify both name servers and DNSSEC delegations.

> In addtion to a replacement for DS records, this document also introduces a 'dnskeyref' parameter that provides more flexibility and reduces the need to coordinate both for key rollovers and for multi-signer setups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to a replacement for DS records, this document also introduces a 'dnskeyref' parameter that provides more flexibility and reduces the need to coordinate both for key rollovers and for multi-signer setups.
```

There are two main problems with the current DS record.
The first is a DS record refers to a key in a DNSKEY RRset.
Updating this keys (during a key rollover) requires updating the corresponding DS record.
At the moment there is no widespread mechanism to update DS records automatically.
However, even if such an update mechanism would become widespread, the signer

> also has to track to propagation of the new DS record to the secondaries of the parent zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, even if such an update mechanism would become widespread, the signer also has to track to propagation of the new DS record to the secondaries of the parent zone.
```

The solution to these problems is to introduce a dnskeyref parameter that contains the names of DNSKEY RRsets that are allowed to sign a zone.
This extra level of indirection avoids the need to involve the parent during key rolls.
Multiple DNSKEY RRsets make it possible to perform key rolls in a multi-signer setup without coordination.
Finally, this allows a single DNSKEY RRset to be used for multiple domains.

The charter for the Deleg working group has the following:

{:quote}
> The DNS protocol has limited ability for authoritative servers to signal their capabilities to recursive resolvers. In part, this stems from the lack of a mechanism for parents (often registries) to specify additional information about child delegations (often registrants) beyond NS, DS, and glue records. Further complicating matters is the similar lack of a mechanism for a registrant to signal that the operation of a delegation point is being outsourced to a different operator, leaving a challenge when operators need to update parental information that is only in the control of the child. Data is often out of synchronization between parents and children, which causes significant operational problems.

> Most focus until today has been on making it possible to update the name servers of a delegation without involving the registrant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main focus to date has been on making it possible to update the name servers of a delegation without involving the registrant.
```

However, DNSSEC has a similar problem.

The introduction of the dnskeyref parameter make it possible to manage DNSSEC without involving the registrant.

> One extra feature that becomes possible the use of SVCB-style records is to let the zone manage downgrade attacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One extra feature that becomes possible with the use of SVCB-style records is to let the zone manage downgrade attacks.
```

> By introducing ds of dnskeyref parameters at different priority level, the zone can signal which algorithm is preferred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By introducing ds or dnskeyref parameters at different priority level, the zone can signal which algorithm is preferred.
```

> This document updates Section 2.1.1 of {{?RFC4034}} in the following way: the sentence "If bit 7 has value 0, then the DNSKEY record holds some other type of DNS public key and MUST NOT be used to verify RRSIGs that cover RRsets." is replaced by "If bit 7 has value 0, then the DNSKEY record holds some other type of DNS public key and can be used to verify RRSIGs that cover RRsets if required."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document updates {{Section 2.1.1 of ?RFC4034}} in the following way: the sentence "If bit 7 has value 0, then the DNSKEY record holds some other type of DNS public key and MUST NOT be used to verify RRSIGs that cover RRsets." is replaced by "If bit 7 has value 0, then the DNSKEY record holds some other type of DNS public key and can be used to verify RRSIGs that cover RRsets if required."
```

> This document updates Section 5.3.1 of {{?RFC4035}} and replaces the sentence "The RRSIG RR's Signer's Name field MUST be the name of the zone that contains the RRset." with "The RRSIG RR's Signer's Name field MUST be the name of any DNSKEY RRset that is allowed to sign the zone."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document updates {{Section 5.3.1 of ?RFC4035}} and replaces the sentence "The RRSIG RR's Signer's Name field MUST be the name of the zone that contains the RRset." with "The RRSIG RR's Signer's Name field MUST be the name of any DNSKEY RRset that is allowed to sign the zone."
```

{:removeinrfc}
## Incremental Deleg

> This document builds on {{?I-D.homburg-deleg-incremental-deleg}} so examples
> will show _deleg labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document builds on {{?I-D.homburg-deleg-incremental-deleg}} so examples will show _deleg labels.
```

In contrast the same setup but then with {{?I-D.homburg-deleg-incremental-deleg}} will work.

## Terminology

{::boilerplate bcp14-tagged}

This document follows terminology as defined in {{?RFC9499}}.

Throughout this document we will also use terminology with the meaning as defined below:

{: vspace="0"}
Incremental deleg:
: The delegation mechanism as specified in {{?I-D.homburg-deleg-incremental-deleg}}.

Incremental delegation:
: A delegation as specified in {{?I-D.homburg-deleg-incremental-deleg}}.

AliasMode:
: An SVCB mode as specified in {{?RFC9460}}.

ServiceMode:
: An SVCB mode as specified in {{?RFC9460}}.

SvcParamKey:
: An SVCB field as specified in {{?RFC9460}}.

SvcParamValue:
: An SVCB field as specified in {{?RFC9460}}.

# New parameters

Two new SVCB-style parameters are introduced: ds and dnskeyref.

To limit validation resources and avoid accidentally delegating security, these two parameters are not valid after following an SVCB-style record in AliasMode.

> For DELEG records, these parameters are allowed to be added to DELEG records in
> AliasMode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For DELEG records, these parameters are allowed to be added to DELEG records in AliasMode.
```

To increase flexibility, a DELEG record in ServiceMode can be created with just ds or dnskeyref parameters but without name server delegation.
In that case the TargetName has to be set to ".".
Unlike SVCB records, for DELEG we allow mixing of AliasMode and ServiceMode records.

## The ds parameter

The ds parameter puts the equivalent of multiple DS records in one parameter.

> To simplify parsing, the presentation format is a space separated list of strings where each string is in the form \<key-tag>:\<algorithm>:\<igest-type>:\<digest>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To simplify parsing, the presentation format is a space separated list of strings where each string is in the form \<key-tag>:\<algorithm>:\<digest-type>:\<digest>.
```

> The parts key-tag, algorithm, digest-type and digest have their meaning and
> encoding as described for the presentation format of the DS record (See {{?RFC4034}}, Section 5.3).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parts key-tag, algorithm, digest-type and digest have their meaning and encoding as described for the presentation format of the DS record (See {{?RFC4034, Section 5.3}}).
```

> A parameters start with a 2-octet field that contains the SvcParamKey following
> by a 2-octet field containing the length of the SvcParamValue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A parameters start with a 2-octet field that contains the SvcParamKey following by a 2-octet field containing the length of the SvcParamValue.
```

> For the ds parameter, the SvcParamValue field consists of a sequence of
> DS record RDATA octet sequences prefixed by a 1-octet length field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the ds parameter, the SvcParamValue field consists of a sequence of DS record RDATA octet sequences prefixed by a 1-octet length field.
```

The length field contains the length of the DS record RDATA.

> The encoding of the RDATA octet sequence is the same as for an equivalent
> DS record (with the exact same owner name as the SVCB-style record that
> contains the ds parameter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The encoding of the RDATA octet sequence is the same as for an equivalent DS record (with the exact same owner name as the SVCB-style record that contains the ds parameter).
```

## The dnskeyref parameter

The dnskeyref parameter names one or more DNSKEY RRsets.
The presentation format of the value is a space separated list of DNS names.

> The wire format starts with a 2-octet field that contains that SvcParamKey followed by a 2-octet filed than contains the length of SvcParamValue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The wire format starts with a 2-octet field that contains that SvcParamKey followed by a 2-octet field than contains the length of SvcParamValue.
```

> For dnskeyref, the SvcParamValue consists of just a concontenated list of uncompressed DNS names in wire format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For dnskeyref, the SvcParamValue consists of just a concatenated list of uncompressed DNS names in wire format.
```

DNS names are self terminating so there is no need for extra length fields.

# Validator behavior

When following a delegation, a validator MUST first look for an Incremental delegation.
If presence or absence is not DNSSEC Secure (i.e., the status is Insecure, Bogus or Indeterminate) then the child is not secure and the algorithm stops here.

> If absence of an Incremental delegation is proven to be Secure then then validator MAY continue validating using DS records.

Reviewer: MAY? Moet dat niet MUST zijn?

If a secure Incremental delegation is found then the validator MUST ignore any DS records and solely rely on what is found in the Incremental deleg records.

> If the Incremental deleg records contain no ds or dnskeyref parameters or these do not lead to any key with an algorithm that the validator supports then the delegation is considered insecure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Incremental deleg records contain no ds or dnskeyref parameters or these do not lead to any key with an algorithm that the validator supports, then the delegation is considered insecure.
```

A validator MUST NOT use any ds or dnskeyref parameters found after following an SVCB-style record in AliasMode.
Restricting ds and dnskeyref to the top level is essential in preventing a DNS operator (who is supposed to only serve a zone, not sign it) from adding additional ds or dnskeyref parameters.

> To support protection against downgrade attacks, a validator SHOULD consider only SVCB-style records with the highest priority that either have a ds parameter that has a least one algrithm supported by the validator or in the case of dnskeyref, a DNSKEY RRset that contains at least one key with an algorithm that is supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support protection against downgrade attacks, a validator SHOULD consider only SVCB-style records with the highest priority that either have a ds parameter that has a least one algorithm supported by the validator or in the case of dnskeyref, a DNSKEY RRset that contains at least one key with an algorithm that is supported.
```

> After selecting priority level, the validator uses any ds parameters to validate the DNSKEY RRset the apex of the child zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After selecting priority level, the validator uses any ds parameters to validate the DNSKEY RRset at the apex of the child zone.
```

> The DNSKEY RRsets that dnskeyref paramters refer need to be DNSSEC Secure to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DNSKEY RRsets to which the dnskeyref parameters refer need to be DNSSEC Secure to be used.
```

Any DNSKEY RRsets that are not DNSSEC Secure according to the validator MUST be ignored.

\[Note, to be removed for publication. Should the validator check if the Zone Key flag is zero if the DNSKEY RRset is not at the apex. For now assume that it is just like the SEP flag and can be ignored.]

To limit validator resources, when validating a name that refers to a DNSKEY RRset, the validator should only use ds parameters (and DS records) and ignore any dnskeyref parameters.

> Validator SHOULD allow for a DNAME and CNAME chain of reasonable length when
> resolving a name to a DNSKEY RRset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validator SHOULD allow for a DNAME and CNAME chain of reasonable length when resolving a name to a DNSKEY RRset.
```

Now that there are multiple DNSKEY RRsets that may be used to sign an RRset, the validator uses the Signer's Name in a signature to select a DNSKEY RRset to validate the signature. If the name does not match any of the DNSKEY RRset selected in the previous step then the signature MUST be ignored.

# Signer behavior

> Signer MUST put ds and dnskeyref parameters only in DELEG records at an Incremental delegation and not in SVCB-style records that follow a DELEG record in AliasMode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signers MUST put ds and dnskeyref parameters only in DELEG records at an Incremental delegation and not in SVCB-style records that follow a DELEG record in AliasMode.
```

The ds parameter affects signers in one small way: the priority system of SVCB-style records can be used to provide protection again downgrades.
The signer can put a ds parameter with a more secure algorithm in a DELEG record with a higher priority and expect fallback to the less secure algorithm only if the validator does not understand the more secure algorithm.

The dnskeyref parameter requires that the validator puts the name of the DNSKEY RRset in the Signer's Name field of the signature.
This is a small but significant change to how signers operate.
The DNSKEY RRset MUST be DNSSEC Secure and the validation chain MUST only involve ds parameters or DS records.

> In addition DNSKEY records that are not at the apex of a zone MUST have the Zone Key flag set to 0 (bit 7 of the flags field, see {{?RFC4034}}, Section 2.1.1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition DNSKEY records, that are not at the apex of a zone, MUST have the Zone Key flag set to 0 (bit 7 of the flags field, see {{?RFC4034, Section 2.1.1}})
```

> The dnskeyref parameter also supports downgrade protection but has a number of additinal features that can be used by signers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dnskeyref parameter also supports downgrade protection, but has also a number of additional features that can be used by signers.
```

customer2._deleg   IN  DELEG 0 ns.operator1
                   IN  DELEG 1 ( .
                    ds="60485:5:1:2BB183AF5F22588179A53B0A98631FAD1A292118
 370:13:2:BE74359954660069D5C63D200C39F5603827D7DD02B56F120EE9F3A86764247C"
                               )
~~~~
{: title="One separate DELEG record with a ds parameter"}

## One separate DELEG record with a dnskeyref parameter

~~~~
$ORIGIN example.
@                  IN  SOA   ns zonemaster ...
customer3._deleg   IN  DELEG 0 ns.operator1
                   IN  DELEG 1 ( .
                    dnskeyref=customer3.keys.operator1
                               )
~~~~
{: title="One separate DELEG record with a dnskeyref parameter"}

## Two operators with dnskeyref parameters

~~~~
$ORIGIN example.
@                  IN  SOA   ns zonemaster ...
customer4._deleg   IN  DELEG 1 ( ns.operator1
                    dnskeyref=customer4.keys.operator1
                                  )
                   IN  DELEG 1 ( ns.operator2
                    dnskeyref=customer-keys.operator3
                                  )
~~~~
{: title="Two operators with dnskeyref parameters"}

# Security Considerations

> The ds parameter is a slight improvement over the DS record because it allows
> SVCB priorities to be used for downgrade protection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ds parameter is a slight improvement over the DS record because it allows SVCB priorities to be used for downgrade protection.
```

Otherwise, the semantics are the same.
This relies on the restriction that ds (and dnskeyref) parameters can only appear the top level and not after following an SVCB-style record in AliasMode.

The dnskeyref parameter breaks the traditional chain semantics of DNSSEC.
With the ds parameter (or the DS record) the validity of a signature depends only on a chain of cryptographic primitives.
With dnskeyref, a DNS lookup is inserted.
This DNS lookup is protected by a traditional DNSSEC chain, but the presence of the name means that it is no longer a cryptographic chain.

> This trade-off between struct security and flexibility is left to the zone operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This trade-off between strict security and flexibility is left to the zone operator.
```

> A new risk that needs to be consider is old and forgotten dnskeyref parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new risk that needs to be considered is old and forgotten dnskeyref parameters.
```

Old DS records or ds parameters are mostly safe.

> An attacker can only asume then if the attacker can obtain the private key that can sign for the public key that the DS record or ds parameter refers to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An attacker can only assume then if the attacker can obtain the private key that can sign for the public key that the DS record or ds parameter refers to.
```
I have difficulty understanding what you're saying here

This is not impossible but very unlikely.
And the use of hardware security modules (HSM) can make this almost impossible.

> In contrast if a dnskeyref refers to a name in a forgotten domain in the registration of the domain is left to elapse then an attacker may register the name and set up a DNSKEY RRset at the name listed in the dnskeyref parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast if a dnskeyref refers to a name in a forgotten domain and the registration of the domain is expired then an attacker may register the name and set up a DNSKEY RRset at the name listed in the dnskeyref parameter.
```

The risk of this can be reduced by two operational practices.
The first is to put the dnskeyref parameter in the same (AliasMode) DELEG record that provides the name server delegation.
This will make it likely that dnskeyref parameter will be removed once the
name servers no long serve the zone.

> The second practice is that domain that allow registrations (mostly top level domains (TLD) but also other) could install a policy that a dnskeyref parameter has to refer to a DNSSEC Secure DNSKEY RRset set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second practice is that domains that allow registrations (mostly top level domains (TLD) but also others) could install a policy that a dnskeyref parameter MUST refer to a DNSSEC Secure DNSKEY RRsets.
```

> Additionally each DNSKEY RRset that is referred to by a dnskeyref parameter has to be used to sign the zone as served by at least on of the name servers that serve the zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally each DNSKEY RRset that is referred to by a dnskeyref parameter has to be used to sign the zone as served by at least one of the name servers that serves the zone.
```
